YBBN Helicopter Operations (#395)
vatpac-technology/sops: docs/aerodromes/classc/Brisbane.md

  <figcaption>YBBN Maneuvering Area Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

## Helicopter Operations

> Brisbane has one helipad located within the general aviation apron, most rescue helicopters are based within the general aviation maintenance area and will depart from the **H2 taxiway** to save time when operating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Brisbane has one helipad located on taxiway **F4**. Most rescue helicopters are based within the general aviation maintenance area and may operate from taxiway **H2**.
```

#### Waypoints

> VFR and IFR helicopters are normally processed via two visual waypoints north and south of the field, when in VMC conditions. IFR helicopters in IMC conditions may conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via the BN (RADAR) SID from an appropriate runway, unless a visual departure is acceptable. These waypoints are used for **departures** and **arrivals**, depending on weather and traffic conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In VMC, all helicopters are normally processed via two visual waypoints (outlined below) positioned north and south of the field. Where VMC does not exist, IFR helicopters may conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via the **BN (RADAR) SID** from an appropriate runway, unless a visual departure is acceptable.
```

Reviewer: Also would we be able to get a vatSys diagram showing these waypoints? We might be able to talk to the procedural separation acheived by using them as clearance limits, etc here as well

Author: Yeah I would be able to put that together, however VatSys doesn't include Manly Boat Harbour in the BN_VFR maps, only Bald Hills. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/abbec401-ed57-4bee-a8f6-5f0b719e9af4)

> | Direction               | Waypoint       | Name        |
> | ------------------ | -------------- | ---------------- |
> | North      | BLHS   | Bald Hills          |
> | South      | MBHM   | Manly Boat Harbour          |
> | East      | MBHM   | Manly Boat Harbour          |
> | West      | BLHS   | Bald Hills          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Direction of Flight  | Inbound/Outbound Tracking Point | Name        |
| ------------------ | -------------- | ---------------- |
| North      | BLHS   | Bald Hills          |
| South      | MBHM   | Manly Boat Harbour          |
| East      | MBHM   | Manly Boat Harbour          |
| West      | BLHS   | Bald Hills          |
```

#### Departures

> Refer to [Maneuvering Area Responsibility](#maneuvering-area-responsibility) to determine which SMC or ADC position (when non-standard positions are online) is responsible for managing helicopter arrivals and departures.

Reviewer: We'll need to decide which ADC is responsible for each part of the aerodrome, since ADC doesn't own any airspace by default. This might need to be coordinated with the TMA or we might need to give ADC some airspace to manage it themselves. @alphadelta332  thoughts?

> !!! example
>     **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Delivery, helicopter RSCU533, medivac for YXHE, request clearance"  
>     **BN ACD:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Delivery, cleared to YXHE via BLHS, climb 2500, squawk 1256, departure frequency 124.7"  
>     **RSCU533:** "Cleared to YXHE via BLHS, climb 2500, squawk 1256, departures 124.7, RSCU533"
> 
> Taxiway H2 is inside the maneuvering area and therefore owned by **BN SMC-N**, treated like a runway requiring a takeoff and landing clearance by BN ADC. Helicopters departing on other surfaces outside the maneuvering areas should be instructed to *"report airborne"* so the controllers knows when they are active in their airspace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! example
    **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Delivery, helicopter RSCU533, MEDEVAC, for YXHE, request clearance"  
    **BN ACD:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Delivery, cleared to YXHE via amended BLHS, YXHE, climb A025, squawk 1256, departure frequency 124.7"  
    **RSCU533:** "Cleared to YXHE via amended BLHS, YXHE, climb A025, squawk 1256, departures 124.7, RSCU533"

Both taxiway **H2** and **F4** are inside the maneuvering area and treated like a runway, requiring a takeoff and landing clearance from BN ADC. Helicopters departing on other surfaces outside the maneuvering areas should be instructed to *"report airborne"* so the controllers knows when they are active in their airspace. 
```

!!! example
    **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Tower, helicopter RSCU533, H2 ready"  
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Tower, H2 cleared for takeoff"  
    **RSCU533:** "H2 cleared for takeoff, RSCU533"
 
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, contact departures"  
    **RSCU533:** "Departures, RSCU533"

#### Arrivals

> IFR helicopters operating within IMC conditions may conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via an instrument approach for a appropriate duty runway. Standard fixed wing phraseology shall be used during these conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where VMC does not exist, IFR helicopters may conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via an instrument approach for an appropriate duty runway. Standard fixed wing phraseology shall be used during these conditions.
```

!!! example
    **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Tower, helicopter RSCU533"  
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Tower, cleared visual approach H2"  

>     **RSCU533:** "Cleared visual approach H2, RSCU533"

Reviewer: We'll need to sort out the coordination required if ADC is going to clear the aircraft for a visual approach. Might be easier to give BN ADC ownership of the CTR

Author: Not sure if it's worth mentioning, but IRL ADC (120.5) often clears aircraft landing on H2 for the visual approach, and pretty sure ADC-N (118.0) clear aircraft for the visual approach F4 HLS.

Reviewer: Yeah cool, I guess that makes sense based on their likely inbound direction.

> During times of peak fixed wing traffic, instruct helicopters to orbit in present position or overhead the VFR waypoint until advised, and maintain own separation on approach to the helipad.

Reviewer: Are the heli waypoints separated from fixed wing ops? If so, we might suggest that as a course of action exclusively, rather than present position.

Author: The heli waypoints are separated from fixed wing ops, the actual suburb / waypoint of Bald Hills is 6nm north of 01L/19R. I only added the present position call in case the helis are pasted Bald Hills are over some of the closer suburbs.  But from what i've heard IRL, Bald Hills doesn't necessarily act as a clearance limit, just an inbound reporting point. However I may be wrong and it could be important that we mention it similar to how Sydney's coded arrivals work with holding at the limit.

Reviewer: Ah right, that's good then. There's also a likelihood that these aircraft will enter the CTR directly from class G. I suspect we'll end up going down the line of TMA clearing them to say A010V and issuing a clearance limit of the waypoint, then contacting TWR for visual approach clearance (who will instruct them to remain clear of any fixed wing traffic if necessary). If the aircraft is going Class G->CTR, they will likely be told to remain OCTA until that takes place. Hold tight for now and we'll see whether we want to redo the BN CTR jurisdiction

!!! example
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, orbit overhead Bald Hills until advised, traffic is a Fokker 70 on 4nm final 01L, report in sight"   
    **RSCU533:** "Orbit overhead Bald Hills, traffic in sight, RSCU533"  

    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, pass behind that aircraft, maintain own separation, caution wake turbulence, cleared visual approach H2"  
    **RSCU533:** "Pass behind the Fokker 70, maintain own separation, cleared visual approach H2, RSCU553"

Traffic information must be issued to both aircraft.

!!! example
    **BN ADC:** "UTY7241 traffic is a rescue helicopter north of the field overhead Bald Hills, they will maintain own separation and pass behind you on approach, runway 01L, cleared to land"   

>     **UTY7241:** "Copied rescue helicopter, runway 01L cleared to land, UTY7241"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **UTY7241:** "Runway 01L cleared to land, UTY7241"
```

!!! example
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, H2 cleared to land"   
    **RSCU533:** "Cleared to land H2, RSCU533"

> Taxiway H2 is inside the maneuvering area and therefore owned by **BN SMC-N**, treated like a runway requiring a takeoff and landing clearance by BN ADC. Helicopters landing on other surfaces outside the maneuvering areas should be instructed to *"report on the ground"* so the controllers knows when they are no longer active in their airspace.
> 
> !!! example
>     **RSCU533:** "RSCU533, on the ground H2"  
>     **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, contact Ground 124.05"  
>     **RSCU533:** "contact Ground 124.05, RSCU533"  
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both taxiway **H2** and **F4** are inside the maneuvering area and treated like a runway, requiring a takeoff and landing clearance by BN ADC. Helicopters landing on other surfaces outside the maneuvering areas should be instructed to *"report on the ground"* so the controller knows when they are no longer active in their airspace.

!!! example
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, report on the ground"  
    **RSCU533:** "RSCU533, wilco"   
    
    **RSCU533:** "RSCU533, on the ground"  
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533"

```

    **RSCU533:** "Departures, RSCU533"

#### Arrivals

Where VMC does not exist, IFR helicopters may conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via an instrument approach for an appropriate duty runway. Standard fixed wing phraseology shall be used during these conditions.

!!! example
    **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Tower, helicopter RSCU533"  
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Tower, cleared visual approach H2"  
    **RSCU533:** "Cleared visual approach H2, RSCU533"

During times of peak fixed wing traffic, instruct helicopters to orbit in present position or overhead the VFR waypoint until advised, and maintain own separation on approach to the helipad.

!!! example
    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, orbit overhead Bald Hills until advised, traffic is a Fokker 70 on 4nm final 01L, report in sight"   
    **RSCU533:** "Orbit overhead Bald Hills, traffic in sight, RSCU533"  

    **BN ADC:** "RSCU533, pass behind that aircraft, maintain own separation, caution wake turbulence, cleared visual approach H2"  
    **RSCU533:** "Pass behind the Fokker 70, maintain own separation, cleared visual approach H2, RSCU553"

Traffic information must be issued to both aircraft.

!!! example

>     **BN ADC:** "UTY7241 traffic is a rescue helicopter north of the field overhead Bald Hills, they will maintain own separation and pass behind you on approach, runway 01L, cleared to land"   

Reviewer 2: Runway 01L

Author: Fixed

## Helicopter Operations
Brisbane has one helipad located on taxiway **F4**. Most rescue helicopters are based within the general aviation maintenance area and may operate from taxiway **H2**.

ADC shall inform SMC of any inbound helicopters so that they may prevent other aircraft from taxiing on the HLS.

!!! tip
    Refer to [Maneuvering Area Responsibility](#maneuvering-area-responsibility) to determine which SMC or ADC position is responsible for managing helicopter arrivals and departures.

### Waypoints
In VMC, all helicopters shall be processed via two visual waypoints (outlined below) positioned north and south of the field. Where VMC does not exist, IFR helicopters will conform to fixed wing ops and be processed via the **BN (RADAR) SID** from an appropriate runway.

| Direction of Flight  | Inbound/Outbound Tracking Point |
| ------------------ | -------------- |
| North      | BLHS   |
| South      | MBHM   |
| East      | MBHM   |
| West      | BLHS   |

### Departures
Where a helicopter has not filed via the appropriate waypoint, they should be rerouted.

> !!! example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! phraseology
```

    **RSCU533:** "Brisbane Delivery, helicopter RSCU533, MEDEVAC, for YXHE, request clearance"  
    **BN ACD:** "RSCU533, Brisbane Delivery, cleared to YXHE via amended BLHS, YXHE, climb A025, squawk 1256, departure frequency 124.7"  
    **RSCU533:** "Cleared to YXHE via amended BLHS, YXHE, climb A025, squawk 1256, departures 124.7, RSCU533"

Both taxiway **H2** and **F4** are inside the maneuvering area and treated like a runway, requiring a takeoff and landing clearance from BN ADC. Helicopters departing on other surfaces outside the maneuvering areas should be instructed to *"report airborne"*. 

> !!! example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! phraseology
```

ADC shall assess the current traffic situation and, if necessary, instruct the pilot to hold and/or maintain own separation with any arriving or departing aircraft, then clear them for a visual approach to their nominated landing site. 

If holding is required prior to arrival, helicopters shall be instructed to hold at the following positions:

| Inbound Via | Holding Position |
| ----------- | ---------------- |
| BLHS        | Brisbane Entertainment Centre *(3nm northwest of runway 01L/19R)* |
| MBHM        | MBHM             |

!!! phraseology
    <span class="hotline">**TCU** -> **ADC**</span>: "North, helicopter X6G, inbound at A010, clearance limit BLHS"  
    <span class="hotline">**ADC** -> **TCU**</span>: "X6G"  

    **X6G**: "Brisbane Tower, helicopter X6G, for taxiway F4"  
    **BN ADC**: "X6G, Brisbane Tower, cancel clearance limit, track to and hold at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre, maintain A010"  
    **X6G**: "Cancel clearance limit, track to and hold at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre, maintain A010, X6G"

>     **BN ADC**: "X6G, report sighting a Qantas 737, 4nm final runway 19R"  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    **BN ADC**: "X6G, report sighting, and able to maintain own separation with, a Qantas 737, 4nm final runway 19R"  
```

By the book, this extra step is required. IRL, it is usually omitted for operators that use this standard regularly

>     **X6G**: "Traffic sighted, X6G"  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    **X6G**: "Traffic sighted, and we are able to maintain own separation. X6G"  
```
